hey guys I set myself the challenge of
trying to make a video that would
explain why I object to vegan
abolitionism in a way that would be
approachable and easy to understand for
vegans who had never seen my channel
before who had never seen any of my
prior videos talking about this topic
and closely related topics but I will
say as a preface to this discussion that
this is something of a dress before it's
something that's been an important part
of my life for years and if you've been
seriously engaged in vegan politics
philosophy and political philosophy in
the last 10 years you've probably
watching sort of the rise and fall of
abolitionism as a paradigm within the
movement I think there's no doubt that
in the last decade abolitionism has been
the most influential idea certainly
within American english-speaking
veganism I can't say I mean obviously
Japan Germany there are other cultures
that have very different notions and the
American origins of evolutionism are
obvious to me all the time I'm Canadian
but obviously it's easy for me to
understand English in American accent
the concept of abolitionism itself seems
to appeal to a notion of the abolition
of slavery in American history as taught
in American primary schools it's a way
of looking at history that definitely
has heroes and villains angels and
demons and invites us to imagine that we
as vegan activists can play a role in
the next chapter of the world's history
that is tantamount to that is comparable
to the role of abolitionists who fought
against slavery in America's history and
there's a rarely emphasis put on the
Civil War it's rarely phrased in terms
of inviting us to fight in a civil war
that's going to kill enormous numbers of
people so it's a somewhat selective
rereading of that history but
nevertheless the point your distance
starting is the American origins in the
American format so to speak of
evolutionism is obvious even in the name
I'd also say that part of the appeal of
abolitionism just comes to the name
itself so that name is is really loaded
with emotional significance for
Americans it's tied to their history
and ultimately I think vegans who you
know they wanted something catchy and
something that I don't know immediately
suck summons up images not only of
radicalism but of epoch-making
world-changing radicalism in a way that
a tag like ethical vegan doesn't ethical
vegan could be associated with a retreat
with withdrawing from society with
living like a Buddhist monk separating
yourself from society you could be an
ethical vegan and live in a cave but an
abolitionist vegan already the word
summons up this issue of trying to
transform the society or live in
especially the transformation the United
States just as the abolition of slavery
did again don't mention the Civil War I
part of the reason why that
transformation was so dramatic was
precisely the Civil War um no
abolitionism it did also especially to
mention just two varieties because today
there are different leaders in the
abolitionist vegan movement or movements
plural and they do debate with one
another that you disagree with one
another vociferously but for example
Gary francais on a is one famous leader
in that and ween see on the founder of
direct action everywhere is another they
have taken that concept in different
directions and as mentioned they they
engage in I guess you could say healthy
intellectual debates now there's an old
idiom in English of a dancing bear not a
very vegan image when a bear gets on
stage and dances you're not asking the
audience whether or not the bear is
dancing well the audience is expected to
applaud because the bear is dancing at
all we have to be honest the caliber of
intellectual debate within veganism is
so low that as with the dancing bear I'm
not going to sit here and tell you that
the quality of the debate surrounding
abolitionism is poor the fact that there
is an intellectual debate at all the
fact that there are multiple
philosophies debating the future of you
know veganism as a political movement
like the dancing bear we applaud just
because there is any such performance at
all and I mean that believe it or not as
a sincere compliment away even though I
disagree a great deal with people like
Gary Francie own and whence young even
though in many ways their work seems to
me astoundingly
stupid to be blunt I can realize sorry I
can i Iike it's completely obvious to me
that these are people who have good
intentions and they're piously in their
own way trying to save the planet no
more no less alright with all that
haven't been said what is the
philosophical problem at the root of the
abolitionist approach philosophically
and I'm emphasizing we're
philosophically because when we're
talking about philosophy we're not
talking about methods of effective
activism so the way that direct action
everywhere organizes a public protest
that's a question of effective activism
I already have many videos address to
that philosophically I think the error
they're engaged in is refusing to admit
of a difference between prescriptive
ethics and descriptive ethics so they
are refusing to admit of a difference
between statements about what you ought
to do in analytical statements about
trying to understand what the situation
really is analytical statements involve
Shades of Grey they involve statements
about what's comparatively better and
comparatively worse sometimes truly
hypothetical sometimes actual sometimes
dealing with historical examples so for
example we could have a conference where
we compare North Korea to Iraq let's say
that conference let's say we had a bunch
of historians academics political
scientists different political figures
come to a conference back in the year
2000 talking about the dictatorship in
Iraq at that time and the dictatorship
in North Korea the abolitionist vegan
position would be outraged by this of
course this is a comparison and say how
dare you draw up an analysis where you
talk about which is better and worse how
dare you deal with these shades of grey
these complex contradictions you only
can respond to this by taking an
abolitionist position of saying no all
dictatorship has to end now let's say at
this conference not only do they compare
North Korea and Iraq but they talk about
the whole range of possible
interventions they talk about ways to
meliorate he
rights conditions right and now as we
know in the years after 2000 there have
been unending wars in Iraq and you know
one of the reasons why in political
science we talk about halfway measures
is precisely to avoid war it's very easy
to come to conclusion as George W Bush
did that the way to abolish a
dictatorship is to drop bombs on it and
if you're over the age of 20 you
probably now have some memory of how
that's gone in the last ten plus years
well we're way past ten years on that
now aren't we anyway so again the
abolitionist position is refusing to
admit not only the shades of grey
analytically but that in terms of
prescriptive ethics we get into
statements about what you should do that
again are morally loaded and complex yes
it's very easy for me to say everyone
should stop eating meat it's very easy
for me to say that Iraq should cease to
be a dictatorship or should become a
democracy it's easy for me to say that
about North Korea also but to wade into
the complex analytical and prescriptive
details of what we can actually do
brings us into murky shades of gray and
that's what we do in politics since we
don't political science from the outfit
of the Omega from page one to page to
the last page of the book folks um
that's rupa Philip philosophy is
something separate from political
science but philosophically we can't
disable ourselves we can't present or
prevent ourselves from being able to
deal with all those rich shades of grey
so in terms of illustrating this because
I'm talking with a principle thing but
now I'm going to get into the particular
just enough so you can understand my
point if you want to help a particular
population of dolphins this is my
favorite example I have used it before
the abolitionists would actually object
to this because you're breaking a number
of their sacred rules a number of their
pious precepts how can you help just
dolphins that speciesism you're supposed
to treat dolphins as equal to mosquitoes
you're supposed to eat dolphins as equal
to cows and foxes and everything else
they object to any single issue cause so
if I set up a charity as a vegan and I
say yeah you know what I care about cows
I care about pigs but I especially care
about this particular population of
dolphins in this particular River in
South East Asia we have dolphins that
live in rivers I know the more famous
dolphins live in the ocean there are
also river dolphins um I want to prevent
this population dolphins are going
stings I want to deal with this issue
this matters to me yes it's a single
issue cause no it's not going to abolish
the meat and dairy industry no it's not
going to convince the world to give up
wearing leather and to instead where
synthetic fabrics or what have you it's
not going to rest any of those issues
but I care about these dolphins now and
if somebody doesn't do something now or
in the next ten years they're going to
go extinct now of course it could be
dolphins it could be monkeys you can
pick any example but the reality of
activism in the real world does involve
those kinds of compromises it does
involve rolling up your sleeves and
engaging in some single issue causes and
otherwise the consequence reps with
terrible so if these concepts they're
employing whether it's the anti species
this notion which is useful within some
limits so you know I do think it's
useful you guys have probably seen the
t-shirts that say why do you love one
and kill the other and it compares a dog
to a pig completely agree i think that
dogs dogs and pigs and wolves and lions
it is very useful philosophically to be
able to point out to people the
difference is we create between them
ethically are counterproductive fine
however if you're in the abolitionist
paradigm the next step is for you to
claim that we cannot engage in any
single issue activity then it means we
can't help lions and we can't help
dolphins and we can't help dogs either
right so this is a moral position that
has gone past the point of diminishing
returns and it's become observed in
counterproductive now again why is that
I think the fundamental philosophical
error is failing to deal with the nature
of prescriptive ethics statements about
what you should do
as opposed to descriptive and analytical
ethics this video is now 11 minutes long
um I just point out I have only talked
about this fundamental philosophical
issue there's then a kind of magical
bridge from how you get from this
concept of the abolitionist refusal to
engage in single issue causes the notion
that we should only focus on in the
industry how do you cross the bridge
from that to the specific model of
activism that direct action everywhere
involves it in gauges in that involves
some some ridiculous forms of protests
such as running into the running from
the crowd of a baseball stadium onto the
field I can give you a clip of them
doing exactly that their method of
disruption of jumping over the barrier
and trying to interrupt Bernie Sanders
when he's speaking there is no logical
dotted line that connects their
philosophy to their pragmatic ideas
about effective activism now admittedly
that's a separate critique a separate
set of questions that you could have a
totally different philosophy and still
believe in those methods and there
already have been videos on this channel
debating that abolitionism I really do
think most of its public profile comes
from the name itself and comes the fact
that so many vegans feel lonely and
powerless and they want an ideology that
makes them feel like they're part of a
massive movement that's challenging
society fundamentally in the same way
that the abolition of slavery did but
you know it might be more humble and
effective if we coin some totally new
term like disassembled ism I checked
google no other political ideology has
used that disassembled ism and we admit
it you know what even though we care
about circuses even though we care about
zoos even though we care about the use
of animals in vivisection and cancer
research we have to recognize the
overweening importance of disassembling
the meat and milk and leather industry
that currently stands at the core of our
society at the core of our economy the
core of our culture in some ways and
that it's an enormous task in the next
hundred years it's a task of such
the tragic enormity that even if we
focus all of our efforts on it I don't
know how much we could accomplish the
next 50 years say right and that many of
these other issues although I do think
they're worth debating do you think
they're worth understanding i think it's
worth and i have several hours
discussing just zoos on this channel to
have a great video with jay costly on
that and so on someone who used to be at
an employee ensues and he knows behind
the scenes that work I do think those
ethical issues are interesting and
illuminating and there are philosophical
significance but pragmatically and
politically if we started from
acknowledging just one goal of that kind
if we were looking at actually
abolishing industrialized meat
production in the next hundred years at
the same time we would recognize you
know what dealing with hunters is not a
priority dealing with seal hunters in
the Arctic Circle of canada is not
important doesn't mean it's right
doesn't mean I'm a species essed it
doesn't mean I love cows and hate seals
doesn't mean any of those things but it
means ok with all due humility we have
to set these sort of priorities and I
think that more humble and pragmatic
approach whether or not it has a fancy
term like disassembled ISM attached to
it that's the approach that lets you
recognize if I want to save these
dolphins in this river here's what I
have to do and it may involve all kinds
of moral compromises it may involve
cooperating with fishermen it may
involve cooperating with hunters it may
involve cooperating with all kinds of
non vegans but who agree with you who
are united with you who stand together
with you and support you on that one
issue of helping those dolphins